# Eyelid Disorders

What are eyelid disorders? Eyelid disorders include a variety of conditions that affect your eyelids. Your eyelids protect your eyes and help keep them healthy. When you blink, they spread tears across your eyes and help wash away dirt or dust. You also close your eyelids when something comes near your eyes to protect them from injury. Like other parts of your body, your eyelids can get infected , become swollen, or develop growths or eye cancer . What causes eyelid disorders? The cause depends on the type of disorder. Some eyelid disorders may run in families, while others happen for unknown reasons. What are common eyelid disorders? There are many kinds of eyelid problems. They can cause swelling, infection, irritation, or change how your eyelids look or move. Some may cause lumps or growths on or around the eyelids. Eyelid disorders that cause swelling, redness, or infection include: - Stye (hordeolum). A small, red, painful bump caused by a bacterial infection in an oil gland. A chalazion is a painless lump that may form after a stye. - Blepharitis. Makes your eyelids red, itchy , or burning and can cause crusty eyelashes. It's often linked to bacteria or skin conditions like rosacea . - Periorbital cellulitis. A bacterial infection of the eyelid and nearby skin. If it spreads behind the eye ( orbital cellulitis ), it needs immediate medical care. Eyelid disorders that affect eyelid position or movement include: - Ectropion (eyelids turn out). The inner eyelid is exposed, which can cause irritation or tearing. - Entropion (eyelids turn in). The eyelashes rub against the eye, causing discomfort or damage. - Ptosis (drooping eyelid). Often caused by weak muscles, aging, or nerve damage. Eyelid growths include: - Xanthelasma . Yellowish patches of cholesterol near the inner corners of the eyelids. - Papilloma. A benign (noncancerous), wart-like skin growth. - Basal cell carcinoma. The most common eyelid cancer, often on the lower eyelid. - Squamous cell carcinoma. A less common but faster-growing skin cancer. - Sebaceous gland carcinoma. A rare but serious cancer of the eyelid's oil glands. Eyelid disorders that affect blinking or eyelid movement include: - Blepharospasm. Eyelid blinking or twitching you can't control. - Myokymia. A minor, occasional eyelid twitch often caused by fatigue or stress. What are the symptoms of eyelid disorders? Symptoms can vary depending on the condition but may include: - Feeling like something is in your eye - Burning or stinging - Watery or itchy eyes - Red, swollen eyelids - Blurry vision How are eyelid disorders diagnosed? Your eye care specialist may diagnose eyelid disorders during an eye exam . They may also ask about your medical and family history to help find the cause. How are eyelid disorders treated? Treatment depends on the cause of the disorder. Some eyelid conditions get better on their own or may be related to another health condition . Keeping your eyelids clean can help prevent irritation and infection. If you need treatment, it may include: - Warm compresses - Medicines or ointments - Eye drops - Surgery (less common) - Lifestyle changes, such as getting more sleep or cutting back on caffeine

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/eyeliddisorders.html
MeSH: Eyelid Diseases (D005141)
Categories: Eyes and Vision