# Health Risks of an Inactive Lifestyle
Also known as: Sedentary lifestyle, Sitting disease

What is an inactive lifestyle? Being a couch potato. Not exercising. A sedentary or inactive lifestyle. These all mean the same thing: a lifestyle with a lot of sitting and lying down, with very little or no exercise. People are spending more time doing sedentary activities. During our leisure time, we are often sitting while using a computer or other device, watching TV, or playing video games. Many of our jobs have become more sedentary, with long days sitting at a desk or while commuting. And the way most of us get around involves sitting - in cars, on buses, and on trains. How does an inactive lifestyle affect your body? When you have an inactive lifestyle: - You burn fewer calories. This makes you more likely to gain weight - You may lose muscle strength and endurance, because you are not using your muscles as much - Your bones may get weaker and lose some mineral content - Your metabolism may be affected, and your body may have more trouble breaking down fats and sugars - Your immune system may not work as well - You may have poorer blood circulation - Your body may have more inflammation - You may develop a hormonal imbalance What are the health risks of an inactive lifestyle? Having an inactive lifestyle can increase your risk of developing chronic (long-term) diseases. This is sometimes referred to as "sitting disease". By not getting regular exercise, you raise your risk of: - Obesity - Heart diseases , including coronary artery disease and heart attack - High blood pressure - High cholesterol - Stroke - Metabolic syndrome - Type 2 diabetes - Certain cancers, including colon , breast , and uterine cancers - Osteoporosis and falls - Increased feelings of depression and anxiety Having a sedentary lifestyle can also raise your risk of premature death. And the more sedentary you are, the higher your health risks are. How can I get started with exercise? If you have been inactive, you may need to start slowly. Your health care provider can help you choose the best type or amount of activity for you based on your fitness level and health. You can keep adding more exercise gradually. The more you can do, the better. But try not to feel overwhelmed and do what you can. Getting some exercise is always better than getting none. Eventually, your goal can be to get the recommended amount of exercise for your age and health. There are many ways to get exercise; it is important to find the types that are best for you . You can also try to add activity to your life in smaller ways, such as at home and at work. How can I be more active around the house? There are some ways you can be active around your house: - Housework, gardening, and yard work are all physical work. To increase the intensity, you could try doing them at a more vigorous pace. - Keep moving while you watch TV. Lift hand weights, do some gentle yoga stretches, or pedal an exercise bike. - Work out at home with a workout video (on your TV or on the internet). - Go for a walk in your neighborhood. It can be more fun if you walk your dog, walk your kids to school, or walk with a friend. - Stand up when talking on the phone. - Get some exercise equipment for your home. Treadmills and elliptical trainers are great, but not everyone has the money or space for one. Less expensive equipment such as yoga balls, exercise mats, stretch bands, and hand weights can help you get a workout at home too. How can I be more active at work? Most of us sit when we are working, often in front of a computer. It can be challenging to fit physical activity into your busy workday, but here are some tips to help you get moving: - Get up from your chair and move around at least once an hour - Park at the back of the parking lot - Stand when you are talking on the phone or during a video conference - Find out whether your company can get you a stand-up or treadmill desk - Take the stairs instead of the elevator - Use your break or part of your lunchtime to walk around the building - Stand up and walk to a colleague's office instead of sending an email - Have "walking" or standing meetings with co-workers instead of sitting in a conference room The good news is that it's never too late to change your exercise habits. You can start slowly and find ways to fit more physical activity into your life. Regular exercise has many benefits and may help prevent or control many diseases.

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/healthrisksofaninactivelifestyle.html
MeSH: Sedentary Behavior (D057185)
Categories: Wellness and Lifestyle, Fitness and Exercise