# Health Problems in Pregnancy

What are health problems in pregnancy? A health problem in pregnancy is any disease or condition that could affect your health or the health of your fetus . Some health problems may make it more likely that you will have a high-risk pregnancy. A high-risk pregnancy is one in which you, your fetus, or both are at higher risk for health problems than in a typical pregnancy. But just because you have health problems, it doesn't mean that you, or your fetus, will have a problem during the pregnancy. Taking care of yourself and getting early and regular prenatal care from a health care provider may help you reduce pregnancy risks from health problems. What raises my risk for health problems during pregnancy? Every pregnancy has some risk of problems, but your lifestyle, as well as factors like certain conditions and health issues, can raise that risk, such as: - A health condition you had before you got pregnant - A health condition you develop during pregnancy - A pregnancy with more than one baby - A health problem that happened during a previous pregnancy and could happen again - Substance use during pregnancy - Being over age 35 Any of these can affect your health, the health of your fetus, or both. Can chronic health conditions cause problems in pregnancy? Every pregnancy is different. If you have specific risks in one pregnancy, it doesn't mean that you will have them in another. But, if you have a chronic condition, you should talk to your provider about how to minimize your risk before you get pregnant. Once you are pregnant, you may need a health care team to monitor your pregnancy. Some common conditions that can complicate a pregnancy include: - High blood pressure - Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) - Kidney problems - Autoimmune disorders - Thyroid disease - Obesity - HIV - Cancer - Infections Other conditions that may make pregnancy risky can develop during pregnancy - for example, gestational diabetes and Rh incompatibility . Can health problems in pregnancy be prevented? You may be able to lower your risk of certain health problems by making healthy lifestyle changes before you get pregnant. These can include reaching a healthy weight, not smoking , and managing any health conditions. However, health problems during pregnancy are not always preventable. Some chronic conditions can be treated and controlled, while others aren't treatable and carry a higher risk than usual, even if the health problem is well-managed. Share your symptoms with your provider for early detection and treatment of health problems. Sometimes, it's hard to know what's normal. Some symptoms, like nausea , back pain , and fatigue , are common during pregnancy, while other symptoms, like vaginal bleeding or a severe or long-lasting headache , can be signs of a problem. Call your provider to let them know if something is bothering or worrying you.

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/healthproblemsinpregnancy.html
MeSH: Pregnancy, High-Risk (D018566), Pregnancy Complications (D011248)
Categories: Pregnancy and Reproduction, Female Reproductive System