# Healthy Living

What is healthy living? Healthy living means taking care of your body and mind by making choices that support your overall wellbeing. Many things affect your health. Some you can't control, like your genetic makeup or your age. But there are many daily habits you can change to help you feel your best. Creating new healthy habits takes time, but small, steady changes are easier to maintain and can become part of your everyday routine. Why is healthy living important? Healthy living can help you feel better, boost your energy, and lower your risk for serious health problems such as heart disease, cancer, and stroke. What steps can I take toward healthy living? You don't have to change everything at once. Start with a few steps to build a foundation for a healthier lifestyle. These can include: - Get the screening tests recommended for you, including those specific to women's health and men's health - Stay up to date on vaccines to protect yourself from disease - Maintain a healthy weight that's right for you - Eat a variety of healthy foods , and limit calories, added sugar, and saturated fat - Be physically active , even small amounts of exercise can be helpful - Keep your blood pressure and cholesterol in a healthy range - Don't smoke , or take steps to quit if you do - Protect your skin from too much sun - Limit alcohol , or choose not to drink at all - Get enough sleep each night to help your body and mind recharge - Manage stress and work on improving your mental health , such as by practicing meditation, relaxation techniques, or gratitude - Protect yourself from sexually transmitted infections (STIs) - Visit your health care provider regularly for checkups - See your dentist and eye care specialist for routine care - Stay connected with friends, family, or community groups, and do activities you enjoy Healthy living is a lifelong journey. Over time, small steps can add up to big health benefits.

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/healthyliving.html
MeSH: Healthy Lifestyle (D000070497)
Categories: Wellness and Lifestyle