# HPV
Also known as: Human papillomavirus

What is HPV? Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of more than 200 related viruses. Some of them are spread through sexual contact. Most people have been exposed to HPV. Usually, your immune system controls HPV infections, and they go away on their own and don't cause any health problems, but some need treatment. There are two categories of sexually transmitted HPV. They are called low-risk HPV and high-risk HPV. Sometimes high-risk HPV infections can stay at the cervix (the lower part of a woman's uterus) for many years. This can lead to cell changes. If these changes are not screened for and treated, they may get worse over time and become cancer. Low-risk HPVM can cause warts on or around your genitals , anus, mouth, or throat. High-risk HPV can cause various cancers: - Cervical cancer - Anal cancer - Oropharyngeal cancer, a type of head and neck cancer, also called throat cancer - Vulvar cancer - Vaginal cancer - Penile cancer Who is at risk for HPV infections? HPV infections are very common. Nearly all sexually active people are infected with HPV soon after they become sexually active. What are the symptoms of HPV infections? Some people get warts from certain low-risk HPV infections, but the other types (including the high-risk types) have no symptoms. If a high-risk HPV infection lasts for many years and causes cell changes, you may have symptoms. You may also have symptoms if those cell changes develop into cancer. Which symptoms you have depends on which part of your body is affected. How are HPV infections diagnosed? Health care providers can usually find out if you have warts by looking at them. Nearly all cervical cancers are caused by a long-lasting infection with a high-risk type of HPV. Screening can prevent cancer by finding out if you need treatment for changes that might happen before cancer, called precancer. Screening tests for HPV can include: - For women, there are cervical cancer screening tests that can find changes in the cervix that might lead to cancer. As part of the screening, women may have Pap tests (sometimes called a Pap smear), HPV tests , or both. HPV tests use a sample of cervical cells. - Your provider may also suggest a colposcopy to check for abnormal cells. What are the treatments for HPV infections? An HPV infection itself cannot be treated. Because HPV causes cancer at other places in the body, testing for the HPV virus can be helpful to make other treatment decisions. - HPV infection. Talk to your provider about whether you need other tests and how often you should be checked to prevent cervical cancer. - Warts. There are medicines that you can apply to a wart. If they don't work, your provider could freeze, burn, or surgically remove them. - Cell changes caused by infection with high-risk HPV. Treatments may include medicines you apply to the affected area or various surgical procedures. People who have HPV-related cancers usually get the same types of treatment as people who have cancers that HPV does not cause. An exception to this is for people who have certain oral and throat cancers. They may have different treatment options. Can HPV infections be prevented? Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If you or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Vaccines can protect against several types of HPV, including genital warts and some that can cause cancer. The vaccines provide the most protection when people get them before exposure to the virus. This means that it is best for people to get them before they become sexually active. Ask your child's provider about when to vaccinate your child against HPV. If you're over age 26 and haven't been vaccinated, talk with your provider about the possible benefits of vaccination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/hpv.html
MeSH: Alphapapillomavirus (D052685), Human Papillomavirus Viruses (D000094302), Papillomavirus Infections (D030361)
Categories: Infections, Sexual Health Issues, Female Reproductive System