# Infections and Pregnancy

How can infections affect your pregnancy? During pregnancy , some common infections such as the common cold or a skin infection do not usually cause serious problems. Some infections, such as the flu , can be more severe when you're pregnant. But other infections can be harmful to you, your fetus, or both. Certain infections during pregnancy may lead to or cause complications or health problems for your fetus, such as: - Preterm birth - Low birth weight - Serious illness - Birth defects - Lifelong disabilities, such as hearing loss or learning problems What infections can be harmful during pregnancy? Some infections that can be harmful during pregnancy include: - Bacterial vaginosis (BV) - Group B strep (GBS) - Cytomegalovirus - Hepatitis - Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) - Toxoplasmosis - Urinary tract infections - Yeast infections - Zika virus What are the symptoms of an infection during pregnancy? Sometimes, it's hard to know what's normal during pregnancy. Symptoms of an infection can vary based on the infection. Talk with your health care provider about what symptoms to look for and how to keep healthy. But, if something is worrying you, share your symptoms with your provider for early detection and treatment of infections. What are the treatments for infections during pregnancy? If you do get an infection during pregnancy, contact your provider about treatment that will best protect you and your fetus. Only some medicines are safe during pregnancy . Can infections during pregnancy be prevented? Taking care of yourself and getting early and regular prenatal care from your provider may help identify and treat infections early. To lower your risk of certain infections or prevent others: - Don't eat raw or undercooked meat. - Don't share food or drinks with other people. - Wash your hands frequently. - Don't clean litter boxes. Cats can transmit toxoplasmosis. - Talk to your provider about vaccinations . - If you have sex, use a condom every time. Department of Health and Human Services, Office on Women's Health

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/infectionsandpregnancy.html
MeSH: Pregnancy Complications, Infectious (D011251)
Categories: Infections, Pregnancy and Reproduction, Female Reproductive System