# Stroke Rehabilitation

What is stroke rehabilitation? Stroke rehabilitation is a program for people who have had a stroke. A stroke happens when there is a loss of blood flow to part of the brain. Your brain cells cannot get the oxygen and nutrients they need from blood, and they start to die within a few minutes. This can cause lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death. Stroke rehabilitation can help you relearn skills you lost because of the damage. It can help with movement, speech, strength, and daily living skills. The goal is to help you become as independent as possible. Who needs stroke rehabilitation? Rehabilitation is for people who have lost abilities needed for daily life. Stroke rehabilitation is recommended for anyone affected by stroke. Most people who take part in a treatment program recover better than those who don't. The effects of a stroke depend on the parts of your brain that were affected. Your health care provider may recommend care based on your needs. The types of disabilities a stroke can cause include: - Paralysis or problems controlling movement - Pain or other problems with your senses - Problems using or understanding language - Problems with thinking and memory - Difficulty with controlling or expressing emotions When should stroke rehabilitation begin? The sooner you begin rehabilitation, the more likely you are to regain lost skills and abilities. Treatment may start while you're still in the hospital. Most likely it will begin within 24 to 48 hours after the stroke. What does stroke rehabilitation include? The goal of rehabilitation is to help you get your abilities back and regain independence. But the specific goals vary for each person. Your treatment plan will depend on what part of your body or type of ability was affected by the stroke. It may include teaching you new ways to work with disabilities, such as using assistive devices to make it easier to do your usual activities. A plan for stroke rehabilitation can involve many kinds of health professionals. They will work with you to figure out your needs, goals, and make a treatment plan. The types of treatments can include: - Speech-language therapy. To help with speaking, understanding, reading, writing, and swallowing. - Physical therapy. To help you relearn movement and coordination skills, regain strength, and stretch your muscles. - Occupational therapy. To help improve your ability to perform daily living skills such as eating, drinking, bathing, and dressing. - Cognitive therapy. To help you relearn or improve skills such as thinking, learning, memory, planning, and decision making. - Mental health counseling. Therapy, medicine, or joining a patient support group may be recommended to help you cope with emotional or behavioral issues. - Medicine. To treat pain, other health issues, or to help with depression or other mental health conditions following a stroke. - Vocational rehabilitation. To help you build skills for going to school or working at a job. Where does stroke rehabilitation take place? Rehabilitation may start while you're in the hospital. Once you're ready for discharge, you and your family will work with your provider to determine the best setting for your specific needs. These can include: - An inpatient rehabilitation clinic - A home-based program - An outpatient unit - A skilled nursing facility How long does stroke rehabilitation last? A stroke can cause various complications, and each person may recover at a different pace. The length of rehabilitation will depend on how bad the stroke was and any related complications. Some people recover quickly after a stroke, but most people need some type of long-term rehabilitation. This can change as you progress and your needs change. Your willingness to work toward improvement and the support of your family and health care team will help you get the best results. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/strokerehabilitation.html
MeSH: Stroke Rehabilitation (D000071939)
Categories: Brain and Nerves, Surgery and Rehabilitation