# Uterine Cancer
Also known as: Endometrial cancer

What is uterine cancer? Uterine cancer is a cancer that forms in tissues of the uterus , which is sometimes called the womb. The uterus is the place where a fetus grows during pregnancy. There are two types of uterine cancer: - Endometrial cancer is the most common type. This type of cancer begins in the cells lining the uterus, known as the endometrium. - Uterine sarcoma is a rare, more aggressive cancer that is harder to treat. This type of cancer begins in muscle or other tissues in the uterus. Who is more likely to develop uterine cancer? Uterine cancer usually happens after menopause. The cause is unknown. However, some factors and conditions that change the balance of hormones in your body may increase your risk. These can include obesity or metabolic syndrome (a group of risk factors for certain health problems). Other factors and conditions that may increase your risk for: Endometrial cancer - Taking estrogen-only hormone replacement therapy (HRT) after menopause. - Having type 2 diabetes . - Starting menstruation at an early age or menopause at a later age. - Having never been pregnant. - Taking tamoxifen, a medicine used to prevent or treat breast cancer. - Having polycystic ovary syndrome . - Having a mother, sister, or daughter who has had endometrial cancer. - Having certain genetic conditions, such as Lynch syndrome . - Having endometrial hyperplasia (thickening of the uterine lining). Uterine sarcoma - Having had past treatment with radiation therapy to the pelvis. - Taking tamoxifen, a medicine used to prevent or treat breast cancer. What are the symptoms of uterine cancer? The most common symptom of both endometrial cancer and uterine sarcoma is abnormal vaginal bleeding . Both types of uterine cancer may also cause pelvic pain or pressure, unusual vaginal discharge, or an enlarged uterus or pelvic mass. Less common symptoms may include urinating (peeing) often, having trouble urinating, or pain during sexual intercourse. How is uterine cancer diagnosed? If you have symptoms of uterine cancer, your health care provider may: - Ask about your medical history and family health history . - Do a pelvic exam . - Order imaging tests . - Suggest a biopsy or a minor procedure called dilation and curettage (D & C) to check the lining of your uterus. What are the treatments for uterine cancer? Treatment may depend on your health, how much cancer you have, and whether it has spread. The most common treatment is having a hysterectomy , which is surgery to remove the uterus. Sometimes the surgery also removes the ovaries and fallopian tubes. You may have more than one type of treatment. Other treatments may include: - Hormone therapy - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy Can uterine cancer be prevented? There is no sure way to prevent uterine cancer. But you can do things that may help lower your risk such as aiming for a healthy weight , getting regular physical activity , and talking to your provider about the benefits and risks of hormone therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Source: https://medlineplus.gov/uterinecancer.html
MeSH: Uterine Neoplasms (D014594)
Categories: Cancers, Women, Female Reproductive System